# NPM - Node Package Manager


Once you have installed `node`, you should also have access to `npm`. `npm` is a package manager and built tool for javascript projects. If you are learning javascript for the first time and it is your first programming language then `npm` is not going to make much of a difference for your right now.

## What does `npm` do?

It serves as the primary **build tool** for the majority of javascript projects. It allows users to import existing modules for their codebase and allows users to create modules which can be imported into other node modules and vice-versa.

For more involved projects or some of the exercises in this book, you will need to be familiar with some of the basics of `npm`. Particularly with any tasks that have test cases associated, the build system will run them against test cases and a framework called `vitest`.


## Basic `npm` commands and specification

Lets breakdown some of the most common and simple commands for `npm`.

* `npm init` - Initialises a project, will prompt the user on question to be answered for their project. Afterwards, it will create a `package.json` file.

* `npm install` - Without specifying a dependency name, it will install any dependencies listed in `package.json.`
  * `npm install <dependency>` - When specified with a dependency it will download and install the dependency inside a `node_modules` folder. It will update the `dependencies` array in `package.json`

* `npm ls` - Will list all installed dependencies.

* `npm run <script>` - Inside `package.json` there is a field called `scripts`. It will associate a `script` with a command. There is a single script given by default called `test`. You can extend this section.

### Common Usage When Starting

Starting any `npm` project will require the user to use `npm init` within a shell. However make sure you have created a folder where appropriate for your project. As a general rule, each project should be in its own **folder**/**directory**.

After creating a folder and initialising the directory with `npm`, you can simply start writing your code. At this point though you have the following options.

* Continue writing code as your code does not depend on any external module
* Use `npm install <dependency>` to install an external module
* Update `package.json` to include a new script that would be used for your purpose.

For demonstrating `npm install`, you can use `npm install vitest` which will include a testing module inside your project.

You can then update the command for `test` in `script` to match `vitest`. To then demonstrate that this works, you can run `npm run test` which will then execute vitest.

This section of the book should be noted and referred to later on.
