# If-Else and Scope Rules

## Scope and Variable Lifetimes

To denote how long a variable lives for, we are able to outline its existance based on where it was declared within two curly-braces. This is a common idea between most C-derivative languages.

To note: Javascript scoping rules are a little funny, however, variables declared with `let` and `const` make them behave like others.

Let's take a snippet of how scope works below.


```js

let x = 10;
console.log(x);
{
  let y = 20 + x;
  console.log(y);
  {

    let z = x + y;
    console.log(z);
  }

  let z = 100 + y;
  console.log(z)
}
```

We would observe the following:

* `x` is declared and assigned 10
* `y` is declared and assigned 20 + x
* `z` is declared and assigned x + y
* `z` is dropped after printing 40
* `z` is declared and assigned 100 + 30
* `z` and `y` are both dropped

`y` and `z` are declared in *inner scope*, which means that when they are dropped (they live between the time they are created and the closing curly brance `}`), they become inaccessible. A new declaration is effectively treating as a brand new variable just under the same name.

The idea of **lifetime** is applied when the variable starts existing and when it is dropped. That is its lifetime. This is different to the lifetime of data, particularly **reference types**.


## Making decisions 

Without our programs we want to provide paths or branches. This can be performed by using `if` statements. The `if` statement's role is to evaluate a boolean expression and execute the code within branch if it is true.

Below is structure of an `if-else` block.

```
if( boolean_expression ) {
  //If the boolean expression results in being true
} else {
  //If the expression is false
}
```

A good example here is simply comparing numbers.

```js
let x = 10;

if(x > 5) {
  console.log("x is greater than 5");
} else {
  console.log("x is smaller or equal to 5");
}
```

You can nest if statements within other if statements and have multiple conditions with `else if(...)` after the first if statement.

However, lets break down the snippet.

* Line 3, we notice the expression `x > 5`, this is using a **logical operator** that allows us to compare the **left** with the **right**. Since `x` is a variable, it will **read** the value it is currently set to.

**IF** this condition is true, it will proceed down the branch where it outputs `x is greater than 5`. As an experiment, change `x` to `1` and observe. ðŸ’»

However, we have only illustrated the idea of `if` and `else`. What if we want to check if x is < 5 but greater than 2?. We able to add an additional condition using `else if`.

```js
let x = 3;

if(x > 5) {
  console.log("x is greater than 5");
} else if (x > 2) {
  console.log("x is greater than 2")
} else {
  console.log("x is smaller than or equal to 2");
}
```

However, this may seem like it is adding a new kind of construct but it is mostly just another use of `if` and `else`. We can restructure it like so. This demonstrates nesting if statements within each other which we will explore later on.

```js
let x = 3;

if(x > 5) {
  console.log("x is greater than 5");
} else {

  if (x > 2) {
    console.log("x is greater than 2")
  } else {
    console.log("x is smaller than or equal to 2");
  }
}
```

### Logical Operators and Evaluation

From the previous snippet, we have to establish what operators we can use to form a **boolean expression**. However, we should observe what occurs with different expressions.

Use the following snippet for an experiment and note your observations ðŸ“’ ðŸ’»

```js
let a = true;
let b = false
let c = 10;
let d = 20;

if(/* input your expressions here */) {
  console.log("If branch")
} else {
  console.log("else branch")
}
```

Use the following expressions and replace the commented component with it.

* `a`
* `!b`
* `a && b`
* `b`
* `b || a`
* `c > d`
* `d > c`
* `c === d`

Note down what you expected and what matched those expectations and what didn't.

### Booleans forever ðŸ“’

What is crucial is ensuring we have an understanding of boolean logic and being able to form these expressions. We will start with the boolean literals: `true` and `false`.

Let's also expose thee critical operators for this task as well

* `&&` - Logical AND operator, for **true**, the **left** and **right** operands must also be **true**, otherwise it will be false.

* `||` - Logical OR operator, for **true**, the **left** or **right** operands must be true. If both operands are false, it will be false.

* `!` - Logical NOT operator, unary operator, if the operand is **true**, it will the expression will evaluate to **false**.

We will use truth tables to demonstrate how this works.

|x && y |           |           |
|-------|-----------|-----------|
|       |  y=true   |  y=false  |
|x=true | **true**  | **false** |
|x=false| **false** | **false** |

Above we can observe that when either `x` or `y` is false, the result of the expression is **false**.


|x \|\| y |           |           |
|---------|-----------|-----------|
|         |  y=true   |  y=false  |
|x=true   | **true**  | **true**  |
|x=false  | **true**  | **false** |

When `x || y`, only one of them has to be true for the expression to be true.


| !x    |           |
|-------|-----------|
|x=true | **false** | 
|x=false| **true**  |

To conclude, we can observe when we use `NOT`, that whatever x was, !x is going to be the opposite.

<!-- #### Evaluation of expressions ðŸ–Šï¸ -->
<!-- Consider the following - Insert an exercise here --> 


For further information, refer to the MDN documentation.

* `if...else` - [MDN if...else](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/if...else)
