# CSS Basics and Selectors

CSS can be quite confusing for many. You can construct some beautiful and stylish things with but it can feel difficult to find the property you want to use.

## Linking your CSS

Conventionally you will create a stylesheet file (usually `style.css`) that will be linked inside your HTML.

To achieve this, simple use the `link` tag in the header and specify the `rel` and `href` attributes.

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css">
```

## CSS Rulesets

As part of styling our elements, we nee dto construct a ruleset for which they are to obey. These rulesets apply to the following.

* HTML Tags
* Unique Elements
* Classes
* Pseudo-Classes

Commonly, Unique elements (`#`) and Classes `.<name>` usually end up being used the most.

### Defining a ruleset

In the following snippet we will define a class and associate it with a html element.

```css
.warningText {
  color: red;
  background-color: yellow;
  font-size: 18pt
}
```

The snippet above demonstrates a class rule called `warningText`. We can the associate this with any html element.


```html
<p class="warningText">
  Please avoid this particular page! - 404
</p>
```

The above snippet associates the paragraph with the class here. More than one class can be added to a html element.

## Combinators and separators

The following is a list of combinators and separators. These can be used to query additional elements and apply rules

* `+` - Next Sibling Combinator
* `>` - Child Combinator
* `~` - Subsquent subling combinator
* ` ` - Descendent combinator
* `|` - Namespace separator
* `,` - Selector list

Each of these selectors can be combined with others to produce a query like result. For example, if we wanted to construct a rule for all `p` elements inside `#secretdocument`. We are able to do the following.

```css
#secretdocument > p {
  color: blue;
}
```


### More complex rules

While the kind of types we can construct rules for, this can be extended to form a query.

It is easy to get carried away and make many classes. It isn't exactly an incorrect approach but occasionally it is easier to express a query.


## Properites

Each rulesset will contain a list of properties that the element needs to adhere to.

Common properties will be `background`, `color`, `display`, `position`, `text-align` and `width`.

These allow the document to be styled and fit certain dimentions.

```css
body {
  width: 100%;
  height: 800px;
  background-color: blue;
}
```

While the above snippet may not be the most pleasant demonstration, it does show that we are able to style the body tag to take as much space as possible and make the height 800px with the background color blue.

Please refer to MDN for further information on different properties.
