# CSS Media Queries and Transitions

Two important concepts, the first one is going to be involved in how you can use css to make your website/web application responsive to device constraints.


The other concept involves animations and how transitions will occur using css.

## Media Queries

As we have established, CSS is a querying language, media queries is just a variation of that query.

To describe, media queries allow us to apply rulesets given certain constraints that we can probe.

We will use the following ruleset applied to `#app`.

```css
#app {
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: row;
  margin: auto 0;
  width: 100%;
  height: 800px;
  background-color: blue;
}
```


The above segment will stack elements upon the row first. This is typically default behaviour however, if screen size is not suitable for that kind of stacking.

Well, we can check for this.

```css
@media (width <= 700px)#app {
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  margin: auto 0;
  width: 100%;
  height: 800px;
  background-color: blue;
}
```

The change in the rules has result in the flex direction moving to column. This is suitable moreso for mobile devices as it results in elements stacking column wise.


You aren't limited to just checking the screen. This can be overflow of text and checking for screen orientation.

```css
@media screen and (orientation: landscape)
```

For working on devices that aren't a plain-ol desktop or laptop. We need to consider how to best style information and get it to react.

## Transitions

CSS transitions are where we change how the elements moves from one state to another. A transition are part of a ruleset or their own ruleset.

The following demonstrates a delay and a change in the property upon interaction.

```css
#delay {
  font-size: 14px;
  transition-property: font-size;
  transition-duration: 4s;
  transition-delay: 2s;
}

#delay:hover {
  font-size: 36px;
}
```

This results int he font-size going bigger upon hover but the `duration` is over 4 seconds and it takes 2 seconds to enact.
